but whose yen that's the Parliament for
the province the Parliament did not
employ a single translator for any
native language for creative way or
ordinary or any of the others and so
whenever someone stood up and spoke in a
native language in Parliament it was not
recorded it was not transcribed it was
not it was neither recorded history nor
influence politics so that's the kind of
very real erasure that's going on in a
country where now when I put my my card
into an ATM into a bank machine my
choices are do you want English French
or Chinese I don't have a choice for
Korea Ojibwe or Mohawk so that's that's
the question facing Canada from my
perspective as a white person the
question is are we going to sign off on
the slow-motion genocide on suffocating
the last life out of these languages are
we going to be the last generation that
has even any any memory of what our
grandpa grandparents and
great-grandparents could speak of this
heritage disappearing forever or are we
gonna take a stand and try to try to
turn the situation around but if you put
it this way in Canada if we close down
every single Department of Chinese
literature it would not make a goddamn
that a difference it's not like people
in China would be saying oh no what is
the future of Chinese literature going
to be now that they've shut down the
great department that studies Chinese
literature in Vancouver in Toronto but
guess what this whole world of Cree a
jib way mohawk it's hanging by a thread
and if we don't take responsibility for
it and step up in Canada nobody else is
gonna do it
about us Yin this is Jay costly so
lately the host of cruelty free cosplay
is that the channel they get it wrong
okay it's not a name it's a thing it's
an ideal but it is what the channel is
called right so you could I mean you
could you know we brand to a vegan
zookeeper Club a vegan fox hunting
Society
you know we got it you guys
people have been watching my channel for
four years will remember that Jay came
on and we talked a lot about the ethics
of what I call wildlife management
paradigm so animals in the wild animals
in zoos the role of research the
different conflicting factors and how
zoos operate and you know I basically
grew up in the museum field and museums
like zoos of this really weird mix of
for-profit tendencies you know just like
in some ways museums are the same as
Disneyland they just trying to make the
most money possible out of a out of a
crummy attraction in some ways their
educational in some ways they're trying
to be research-based or academic and
likewise we talked about zoos both from
this vegan perspective and just
institutional and political perspective
so if you guys think you recognize him
that's where you know I'm from but he's
also always been a cosplay enthusiasts
and now his channel Bo cosplay and very
often the overlap between cosplaying and
vegan concerns so look this is an
extraordinary day because you actually
wrote down some things you want to talk
to me about some questions let's start
with no more than less do actually want
to ask you a question about something
that you would send on your videos
specifically about the Creed I think I
think it was about the Kree anyway sure
but I'm I remember once I r1 video you
had said that you had had the experience
because you know you studied you studied
those languages and you had the
experience of you know talking to people
within those tribes who it would not
become so strong with the language and
how they had to express the desire that
they they basically wish that they had
had more that training that they were
more attacked with that part of who they
were in a sense and I remember I just
remember you had kind of that one little
no I know but is there any particular
aspect of languages with it well that
that's basically the tragedy of the
whole current generation for the create
at the achieve way and I'd say most most
of the large ethnic groups and native
Canadians now there are exceptions so
I'll just say so what what you've just
said this is a huge sort of tragedy or
struggle for this generation for the
creative way not particularly for the
Inuit being you it are up in the Arctic
they have a different situation not for
a couple of the groups on the far east
coast
so there are some exceptions but the the
bulk of Canada that's the tragedy and
the tragedy runs as follows they had
both three generations that were put
into these violent and demeaning forced
assimilation schools where they were
beaten if they spoke their own language
then forced to speak either English or
French by the way that's another problem
all of them struggle with is actually
English versus French than Canada you
get First Nations people who are
isolated even further because they can
only communicate in French but because
they were given French Catholic school
masters because the Catholic the
Catholic Church wanted those Souls let
me tell you they were motivated they
just wanted it more what the Catholics
were out there you know with their well
organized nuns and priests and there
were a lot of rapes and a lot of
mysterious pregnancies and a lot of
mysterious abortions and a lot of
mysterious anal sex you know all the
things that come with the Catholic
Church having unlimited power over poor
and helpless people in those kinds of
circumstances and yes that that's all
documented and it's all been through the
courts in Canada now so believe me it's
not my imagination running wild
anyone can google this and find a huge
stack of legally vetted documents so
this isn't peer review these have been
through the court system they've been
fact-checking it Accord a law and
settlements have been paid for them
it says not just my opinion but the
first generation to go through that
trauma they generally actually did
continue speaking their own language
amongst themselves but they did not pass
on the language to the next generation
and then the next generation would grow
up monolingual either only in English or
only in French but again speaking those
languages poorly so there is everywhere
you go in Canada there's a distinctive
First Nations accent and it's very hard
for them to get a job and you know
there's already racism against them but
it is true if you have a if you have a
stereotypical First Nations accent in
most of Canada
that's regarded as a huge liability I
think much more than having a Chinese
accent or you know many other or an
Italian accent let's say an Italian
accent is or a British accent is no
barrier at all in Canada
but the First Nations accent this is
definitely part and parcel of this kind
of racism of this and his legacy and now
we're now we're to a third generation
that in many ways wants to recapture the
culture and language and heritage that
was lost maybe you know their
grandparents or their great-grandparents
maybe there's some memory of the family
of what the the language was the
language and the mythology in history
because at the end of the day you know
being creeping a Jib way being mohawk it
has to mean more than the Scott color of
your skin it has to mean more than your
family tree and the all the ways for it
to be more meaningful really are
connected to the language you know did
you give an example this is a very real
example I'm not being snide you know I
went to a political protest of where it
was all creep evil you know it could
have said there could have been a feud
na there were all First Nations people
but the vast majority of were Cree and
you know they played the drums and they
chanted but I was studying Korea as a
language at that time and it was there
with my my wife is now my ex-wife and I
just pointed out to her they're chanting
but they're chanting nonsense words they
know what this song is supposed to sound
like but none of them can actually speak
the language enough you know at this at
this protest to sing in the Cree
language so I mean you can imagine that
for any other language you know you can
kind of make noises that resemble what's
singing frivolous but I said to her look
you know I've read about this in real
peer-reviewed articles real
anthropological research this kind of
song used to have lyrics this these
songs were all about something and we do
have you know a very small number of
them were translated and recorded for
history that way anthropologists or
other researchers actually you know
wrote down the words but we now have a
generation of you know Native Americans
creative way etc where the drum is still
powerful the sound of the music is still
powerful in that context that we're
doing it is an act of political protest
but it's Hollow
it's Hollow in a very real sense because
the words have lost their meaning
on the flip side of that you know I used
I shocked ask yourself this guy Isaac
ask yourself by pointing out that when I
was in Saskatchewan the Parliament there
so that's the Parliament for the
province the Parliament did not employ a
single translator for any native
language for creative way or ordinay or
any of the others and so whenever
someone stood up and spoke in a native
language in Parliament it was not
recorded it was not transcribed it was
not hidden was neither record of history
nor influence politics so the words that
were being spoken in Parliament I mean
though everything being said in English
was being recorded everything he said in
French was being recorded but whenever
native people stood up and spoke in Cree
it was being deleted from history
because the government couldn't employ
two people five people to record that
history you don't even have to translate
it you just have to have to have someone
knows the language well enough to listen
to a recording and then type out the
words right
that's transcription not translation
they didn't even have that so that's the
kind of very real erasure that's going
on in a country where now when I put my
my card into an ATM into a bank machine
my choices are do you want English
French or Chinese I don't have a choice
for Korea Ojibwe or mohawk so that's
that's the question facing Canada from
my perspective as a white person the
question is are we going to sign off on
the slow-motion genocide on suffocating
the last life out of these languages are
we going to be the last generation that
has even any any memory of what our
grandpa grandparents and
great-grandparents could speak of this
heritage disappearing forever or are we
gonna take a stand and try to try to
turn the situation around and you know
for Native people as they say is very
different the
the Cree people I knew a lot of them
were very emotionally people but they
were very emotionally [ __ ] up of the
loss of language and their desire to
reclaim and recapture the language and
yet from coast to coast in Canada you
see different different attempts some
successful and and many failures at
language sure for use so for you if you
wanted one if you wanted one to dabble
in it would definitely be a jib way a
jib way is also known as Anna Schnieder
vanish now bit moyen
but a jib way I'm going to refer to it
as a Jew if it's calm conversation but
you know so a jib way one of the
advantages that it exists both in the
United States and Canada it exists on
both sides of the border whereas Cree is
entirely in Canada so it's more of an
option for you and so a jib way has some
institutional support from the
University of Minnesota um n University
of Minnesota and they do have at least
one course of Pimsleur type course audio
CD core stuff you learn the language so
a Jew boy has a shot in America and in
Canada and so for someone like you that
that would be an option and you know
within Canada Cree has the best chance
the problem with Cree has spread out
over a huge area and it me Cree is
absolutely it's within one generation of
extinction
I mean it's now or never for create but
sure it's it's in the best treatment in
those languages and again sir the
exception is normal when I'm talking
about First Nations I'm talking about
south of the Arctic First Nations it is
indeed a totally different situation for
the Inuit and other groups that are
entirely you know on the ice people who
live that far north where there were no
trees people who people who eat seal
meat we actually had a musician who won
an award in downtown Toronto who was
Inuit and when she accepted the award
you know there the situation like a like
an Oscar Awards and why she stood up at
the podium she stood there and she said
white people
should wear more seal fur and eat more
seal me because you know my cousins want
to make more money other hunting seals
and shingles and what white people don't
buy this stuff anymore you know it's
become unfashionable you know wearing
fur that was her acceptance speech she
won she won for some album she recorded
those he goes and that's a moving
message you know yeah maybe I should
start wearing more seal skin and and
polar polar bear fur polar bear cave
would look great on me so yeah I just
mentioned this is not some kind of
stereotype but yeah their situation is
much different so with with that
exception I mean if you were interested
in going north of the Arctic Circle you
know really the far north then basically
yeah Kree in a jib way and there are
very very similar languages Korean
Ojibwe so they eat each of them as a
shot within Canada we have a hybrid
language which is called og Cree Oh ji -
C REE and that's even closer so to give
an example if you chose to work on og
Cree you could very easily cope with
both Ojibwe and Cree so again that's
that's an appealing option for someone
like me okay
maybe I can get the best of best of both
worlds in this kind of thing but if you
put it this way in Canada if we close
down every single Department of Chinese
literature it would not make a goddamn
that a difference it's not like people
in China would be saying oh no what is
the future of Chinese literature going
to be now that they've shut down the
great department that studies Chinese
literature in Vancouver and Toronto
nobody gives a [ __ ] Canada's second-rate
imitation of Chinese literary studies is
never going to matter and the same would
be true of German literature and you
know font about Buddhism it's just not
the case that people in Thailand are
going to be worried about the future of
Buddhism if Canada were to shut down
every single academic department
studying Buddhist philosophy it's gonna
have zero impact on Thailand or Sri
Lanka they don't give a [ __ ] and
objectively from a global global
perspective we can say it doesn't matter
but guess what this whole world of Cree
a jib way Mohawk it's hanging by a
thread
and if we don't take responsibility for
it and step up in Canada nobody else is
gonna do it it's just not the case that
the great universities in Berlin and
Paris are gonna step up here we in
Canada put all of our money both in
terms of education and high high culture
policy just something like you know
museums and the Opera and the ballet in
Canada the government pours money into
all that crap so that we can have a
second-rate imitation of European
culture so we can have the Toronto
Ballet and the Vancouver Ballet and the
Montreal Orchestra and you know whatever
the I don't know the a de wapis get you
know music festival and it's kind of
stuff it's all about imitating European
culture but the one thing that we're
always gonna be first rate at is
actually our own indigenous culture you
know even if we're terrible even we do a
terrible job we've been doing a terrible
job you know we've been driving this
culture to extinction
you know nobody else in the world makes
you know Inuit statues you know if this
unique tradition of statuary made
primarily out of the tusks of you know
walruses and the whale bone in this kind
of material completely unique art form
okay we're not imitating anybody we're
the best at that we're the best always
gonna be the best you know anything
that's really uniquely rooted in or
growing out it even if it's modern
because though I'm not a traditionalist
I'm all for you know First Nations
culture taking on bold new directions
but whatever those new directions are if
they're really uniquely Canadian that's
what we need to have academically and
and politically you know and culturally
the the support for that's all we can
ever be excellent act and if we [ __ ]
this up it's over it's genocide if
though it's the end game to cultural
genocide you know it's not like Cree
literature is gonna continue in Berlin
or Beijing or anywhere else you know
it's it's here or it's nowhere and I'm
sure I could say the same thing with
only minor modifications if we were
talking about
native tribe south of the border in the
United States but as you know that's not
the summer I just worked on First
Nations in Canada so yeah say this like
you talked about you know can this being
particularly noteworthy for some of the
architecture and artwork from native
First Nations people and things like
that is that something also that you
find that the current generations are
disconnected from you know whether you
know I keep it a hundred percent real
I'm not I'm not gonna [ __ ] you you
know so our native people never built
the the pyramids you know they never
built a great monument like this like
the pyramids of ancient Egypt I'm not
someone who wants to exaggerate the
glory of their of their of their
architecture let's just stick with that
example but architecture being used here
as a shorthand for other forms of
material culture I'm not something to a
slide either way interestingly you know
when my father was much younger probably
when my father was was my age he did I
remember I read one of his old books one
of his books he wrote when he was
relatively young and it was full of this
really an insincere exaggeration of the
greatness of the accomplishments of
native Canadian art basically well my
point is you know what is Canadian
architecture historically if it's just
an imitation of European architecture
it's nothing then there is no Canadian
architecture and for the most part
that's true when you're talking about
white people in Canada imitating
European architecture there is no
Canadian architecture if you even have a
hybrid culture if you have a culture
where it's European technology but
working with native culture and need of
culture appropriate in European building
methods you could have a distinctive
Canadian architecture growing out of
that and that's basically what you had
in in Mexico and that's actually the
national pride of Mexico is there mixed
culture is there culture that is neither
indigenous
European butt is a hybrid taking
advantage of elements from from both
sides of the ocean now there's also
mythology about that the Mexicans want
to make it seem like everyone was equal
and of course the reality of colonialism
and genocide and the Catholic Church has
a lot more brunet however you can't take
away this it is genuinely true Mexico
has there is Mexican art and it's not
Spanish art there is Mexican cuisine
there's Mexican food and it's not
Spanish cuisine and there is Mexican
architecture and absolutely none of
those things is true of Canada because
the British Empire in Canada was not
based on on a hybrid culture or a
cooperative culture finding any of those
things the the the culture in Canada was
based on on absolute genocide I just
mentioned as one example of that there
were historically a few newspapers
printed in Korea Ghibli Mohawk and these
in these native languages they normally
didn't didn't last very long and our
National Archives you know destroyed
them didn't even keep them you know our
government didn't keep a copy and they
disappeared from history no I did not
look into every single example but I
think I looked into every example for
both Korean a Jib way at least I went I
went to the archives you know looking
into this of course you can do you can
do a partial over the Internet but I
also did a visit archives in person and
talk to professor's so is there any
trace of the newspapers that were
published these languages no there's not
why because the white people who control
those institutions saw their role as the
extinction the progressive
extinguishment of those of those
cultures and languages so it's not an
accident you know those books were
actually burned or thrown in the garbage
and so on those newspapers were
destroyed they were not kept for history
because they thought the future of
Canada was a was a whites-only future
and again Mexico as bad as it was Mexico
also had slavery and genocide and
terrible things but there at least there
was a vision of
of a mixing of an inclusive and
hybridizing cultural tendency and again
another disaster is Brazil but you know
in Brazil also they they basically
assume the people were now we're going
to intermarry so I'm there were
alternatives to this outright this
conversation like remember 2 to 3 light
conversations that were like buried in
that the archives that Matt Colombo's
you know failed zookeeper you know
history but um there's this one
conversation that I've never thought
about before now I I reflect on a
completely different way and it was
literally like like a fragment of like a
five minute like conversation but um we
were basically discussing you know we
had we had basically rescued five new
wolves from this place that got close I
was like a big operation whether he like
sees hundreds of animals but they had
five great wolves like somehow and
basically what the organization want to
do is they wanted what what they were
thinking about doing was they were on
they were exploring the idea of because
they had numbered this before but
allowed allowing the try to I named the
Wolves as kind of gesture of respect and
I remember the conversation we were
having was basically how the meander
didn't think that was a good idea
because he felt like you know literally
if we asked them to vote this is exact
quote what I want to name all the Wolves
chief justic it was like some leader
historical figure his tribe um he was
like he was like what we should do is we
should just picked the Native American
needs ourselves and offered up
and just like will will decide what
native culture is and then in their
interests right yeah yeah yeah no I mean
in some ways that's the that's
definitely the tragedy of maybe the
nineteen 1980s attitude in a nutshell
yeah we had a situation that my wife
started researching and then she never
she never got that far in the research
but a bizarre situation on one
reservation where the the Indian agent
that was the term used in Canadian
government so that the man who was
basically the the dictator he had total
power over the given plot of land and
all the natives living on it the Indian
agent decided to take a tribe and
perform a eugenic experiment where he
separated the members of the tribe whom
he considered genetically superior and
had them interbreed and gave them better
education and did intelligence tests and
this kind of thing and as you can
imagine his idea of genetic superiority
he boiled down to how much they
resembled white people as opposed to
resembling native people and still to
this day that tribe is divided by that
experiment the people who were
genetically superior are one plot of
land and the people who were genetically
inferior on another you know next to
each other and they still have a legal
dispute over who owns what farmland you
know some of the you know some of the
losers and that eugenic experiment want
more of the land back that was taken
away from them because the best land was
given to those people so I mean these
are the games that that white people
played we have this kind of stupid
saying in English you know power
corrupts and you know sort of infinite
power absolute power corrupts absolutely
human reality is a lot more complicated
than that I think the the greatest
tragedy is that that guy he probably
really sincerely believed he was helping
those people
we did it and you know it's not that
well-known but it's if you google it
you'll find evidence confirm this that
the famous left-wing economist John
Maynard Keynes he wasn't that left-wing
but he's claimed the left-wing claimed
him as left-wing now but anyway he was
let certainly left-of-center John
Maynard Keynes famous economist he went
to his grave preaching eugenics he felt
the science of eugenics was going to be
the salvation of mankind so yeah
obviously he wasn't he wasn't Adolf
Hitler or may hell but it's amazing that
very often those people it's not that
absolute power has corrupted them
absolutely it's that they're sincere
believers in ideals that are in a word
evil banished in the first
captive management places I worked at
was in Winchester Idaho which is on a
Nez Perce good I remember I think there
was a more accurate French pronunciation
out there but um their facility was
actually on their land and you know I
think growing up you know especially
reading books and watching movies you
get this idea that Native Americans are
specifically interested in conservation
efforts regarding like native animals
and things like that right you know
specifically highlighting things like
you know a background a tradition that
like incorporates them in a big way I
can especially think of one movie that
was directly tied to this captive
management place that I had were a big
part of the movie was talking about you
know working with them this one tribe
you know to come up with you know they
were supposedly integrally a part part
of like natural program that they were
running they're making decisions about
the pack and things like that and some
of the ceremonies and things like that
they held surrounding bringing those
wolves onto the land but that was kind
of like what I was coming in there with
and the experience that he had with them
from the experience from the perspective
of a 21 year old person biology student
who care deeply about conservation and
it honestly never seriously met a Native
American person in his entire life is
completely negative I mean we had you
know all the people I think can cause
problems there were First Nations people
of that tribe who we had rules like they
were they were basically allowed to kind
of sort of do whatever they wanted on
the land because it was their land but
um we did have people who would you know
they would completely go off the path
and completely go into places where they
would actually scare the wolves and
things like that that we had to deal
with and that was there was some like
pushback with management and not and ask
the people on the ground as far as what
to do about that and things like that
the one thing I remember those like it
was my first time experiencing like
someone with a name like Bob white eagle
remember that name specifically that was
that was absolutely fascinating to me
some of the names like um BS in like I
remembered stories from other people
about you know you know a particular Nez
Perce person upbringing his
grandchildren on the site and basically
walking through the entire visitor
center and basically just talking like a
number of times mentioning oh I hope
that I hope they made the white men pay
a lot for this and things like that
I remember one experience particularly
where I'm we had a we had a green
outhouse basically on site and one of
the things I don't know why we did it
but we basically dumped it out on the
land like at some point and I remember
specifically on the manager said if any
Nez Perce people come here don't tell
them that we did that who said we don't
like what we don't want white man [ __ ]
on our land but um so I had so I had
this and you know basically from my
perspective like a lot of stories from
when I talk about the management weren't
actually true about them being involved
and stuff and from know
the wolf misleading of itself they
weren't really respectful from that so
that was really interesting to me to see
that kind of contrast what I run you
know well okay I think I think that
Congress wins you you kind of in your
mind a bit blown the first time we
talked about this so I remember we
didn't it wasn't like we had a hostile
conversation but I was really saying to
you look you know like First Nations
people Native American people they're
they're fundamentally people like you
know they're not elves they're not you
know they're not guardian spirits of the
4s they're you know I remember so for
you at that time you were kind of
putting together reflecting on this
experience in your past and my very kind
of political realist view of saying look
you know for a lot of them the land
they've been they've been given finally
you know normally after a legal battle
with the federal government the land
they now own that's the only way they
have to make money and they're looking
at all the ways to try to earn a living
out of that land whether it's forestry
or other you know economically and
ecologically exploitative practices for
the most part you know they're normally
not looking at running the land as a
non-profit National Park and if they
were you know it would be a national
park it wouldn't be it wouldn't be their
land so those are tensions I was really
familiar with from Canada I remember the
first time you and I talked about that
you were a little taken aback you know
just just like it's a different
perspective you think about everybody
saying yeah you know I think about it
but yeah it's a very strange kind of a
very strange kind of moral
presupposition that white people demand
that First Nations have you know a code
of ethics that white people themselves
have never had they say okay this is
your land this is how you're supposed to
earn a living
now don't earn a living instead to be
self-sacrificing and live in poverty for
the sake of habitat conservation and
that's that's not what that land is for
you know we have that problem even with
you know endangered well yeah I guess
endangered is the word but endangered
sea creatures on the west coast of
Canada was a real question well why why
don't
First Nations people have the right to
eat abalone abalone is this kind
giant clam like creature at the bottom
of the ocean it's like well the
government decided that it's better for
the government if native peoples land is
reserved for abalone but if it's
actually their land why don't they have
the right to eat their own abalone the
same way you know white people have been
taking away all the abalone all this
time and hiding them at the edge of
extinction
so these are the these the
contradictions inherent in the situation
but sure you know if it's their land if
they own it then it's you know it's not
a national park and if it's a national
park then it's not their land they don't
own it so they're mutually States yeah
it was so weird you wanna go yeah well
the first thing I thought about like I
remember the first thing I thought about
after that was kind of your reflection
yeah you're right
I didn't I hadn't expected that on a big
level but I remembered the manager the
manager who worked there one of one of
his big heroes stories was come
basically coming back at night and
finding a person ations person of that
tribe on the land basically cutting down
trees like on our site you know cuz
logging logging is a big big thing down
in Idaho man I remember like you had
this whole story about being at gunpoint
and stuff like that and talking the guy
down and you know it was this completely
negative like you know hear over his
bill in the situation that let you know
that particularly die inflection
completely put another spin on right
who owns the tree anyway right yeah I
remember uh we my wife and I now my
ex-wife divorced my ex-wife and I we we
bumped into this guy in Taiwan who had a
PhD I think it was a PhD in anthropology
and he was still a true believer in this
idea that somehow Native people are not
real people he really regarded them as
elves or spirits of the forest and you
know when we were talking about
deforestation I really blew his mind
who's talking about it both in Latin
America and in Southeast Asia and I said
look you know the deforestation you're
talking about when Native people aren't
driven off their land when they're not
driven off the land
genocide aliy or what have you then they
are the source of the deforestation
they're the ones
the trees and and making money out of it
and I said you know what what part of
this don't you understand he really did
have a view and it's it's it sounds
ridiculous when you explain it so
clearly he was a white man from an
American University with a PhD he really
did seem to think that cutting down
trees and making money out of it is
somehow something that only white
skinned people do and not brown skinned
people in asia and not put skinned
people in South America and I guess it's
just not true
now conversely you know I mean I've also
had some really surreal conversations
with with Native people for as native
people where I've had to say to them you
know you're not the only people use bows
and arrows like in the history of
England using bows and arrows is a huge
part of history do you know where to say
look I know you think about this as if
our culture is so different from yours
but you know really I'm not joking
that's that's quite a tense conversation
because I remember particularly one one
woman who was at my university she
seemed to regard the bow and arrow as if
it was a unique symbol only of Native
Americans I was like no you took the
whole history of Europe and most of of
Asia of East Asia was also there was a
major part of warfare right up until we
had gunpowder so anyway yeah some of
these things we have in common making
money at a deforestation killing our
fellow man with bows and arrows
you know venison